### Global Literature -- Essay One: Rhetorical Framing in Nabokov's Short Stories

In terms of a significant position, regarding "Nabokov's belief in a
writer's responsibility to the reader and the world at large", there
isn't an overarching one. Rather, there are multitudes of abstractions
writ of his experiences and an esoteric appropriation of
reality---through clever language and witty metaphor, which he was known
for. Many still facilitate that the best source of meaning that can be
derived from fiction is the first name sources of its origin, such as
the author. So, while Nabokov may intend his pieces to be apolitical,
and he is the best source on that, there is still much to be said about
the reality he appropriates through expression, evidenced by text. In
several of his pieces he articulates the nature of tyranny, social
freedoms, and individualism by consequence; and as Thomas Mann is
famously credited, "everything is politics", even art.

In the short story "Cloud, Castle, Lake"; Nabokov tells the story of a
young man, Vasiliy Ivanovich, and his encounters among a pleasure
excursion, that he is mandated to take part in by a 'Bureau of
Pleasantrips'. During this excursion, framed by prognostication of a
joyous sort, Ivanovich is tormented and flagellated by a group of
scurrilous Germans, his co-excursionists. They force him to take part in
collective entertainment and socialization, denoted by singing, games,
and the distribution of provisions.

Nabokov utilizes clever examples to convey the darkly minimalist
overtones that govern the majority of the group, seeking to isolate
Vasiliy---in so doing, isolating the reader. The moments when:
"\[Vasiliy was\]\...requested to put the book aside and join the group,"
(431) and when "The cucumber\..."---"his favourite cucumber"---"was
pronounced inedible, and was thrown out the window," (433); were when
Nabokov articulated with near comical wit that the nature of social
cohesion is based upon coerced happiness, an idea that Nabokov intends
to undermine 'the collective' while maintaining meticulous clarity into
the true feelings of a character the reader is meant to sympathize with,
imagining such loneliness too---contrasting the idea of groups in
general. The actions of the group while mean-spirited seem almost
ridiculous at the beginning of the story, giving way to an ulterior
message about contentedness and how it begets sacrifice at the hands of
the majority. However, nearing the midpoint of the story, Nabokov
produces insight regarding the glimpse of happiness that is in no way
insignificant to the main character and is the namesake of the story
itself. Vasiliy, having entered a rather ordinary room in an inn,
reportedly remarks "I shall take it for the rest of my life," (435);
after having seen the idyllic world beyond the threshold of the
window---a cloud, a castle, and a lake.

Unlike the previous grievances Vasiliy has with instances of group
activity, his intent to stay behind, dreaming of true happiness begotten
by "such \[a\] perfect expression of tender well-meaning beauty," (432),
ends up validating the narrational danger of "the soul, \[and\] the
impossibility of ever finding out \[where it\]\...leads," (432). As
such, we see the consequence of the group's disturbed communal focus,
the destruction of the pursuit of beauty and happiness.

For the reader it becomes easy to see themselves as a substitute for
Vasiliy, a stand in for the Narrator, for Nabokov; all acting in step,
one and the same, rooting for agency and the individualist pursuit of
happiness that Vasiliy seeks. The final line is brought into being---in
abject construction---as the focus, modifying of all of these
perspectives; by saying, "Of course, I let him go," (437); which
exhibits Nabokov's famous attribution of will to his characters.
However, in so doing, this act produces a position, for lack of a better
word, that can be gleaned from the role of this piece, among many. The
position that ideates the importance of free will and how it should
always take precedence over the wants and needs of 'the collective', for
the pursuit of happiness and exhalation of beauty is far less cruel,
than forcing even one person to lose their prized cucumber for the
amusement of others.

The short story, "Tyrants Destroyed" is by all measures Nabokov's
intense detailing of a solipsistic hysteria that spends its time
ravaging a pedagogical insomniac for the purposes of mirroring the base
rage and hatred of tyrants. He accomplishes this by illustrating a
picture of such detail that the main character becomes indistinguishable
in nature from the most brutal of tyrants:

Then again, let me repeat that I am no good at distinguishing what

is good or bad for a state, and why it is that blood runs off it like
water

off a goose. Amid everybody and everything it is only one individual

that interests me. That is my ailment, my obsession, and at the same

time a thing that somehow belongs to me and that is entrusted to

me alone for judgement. Since my early years---and I am no longer

young---evil in people has struck me as particularly loathsome, unbear-

able to the point of suffocation and calling for immediate derision and

destruction, while on the other hand I hardly noticed good in people,

so much did it always seem to me the normal, indispensable condition,

something granted and inalienable as, for example, the capacity to

breathe is implied by the fact of being alive. (440)

The selfish nature of the main character is extrapolated upon by virtue
of the same sing-songy Dostoevskyan monologuing that has filled the waft
of the story thus far, internally remarking, "I die only for myself, for
the sake of my own world of good and truth---the good and the true,
which are now distorted and violated within me and outside me\..., but
will still perform my task," (453-454). This distortion of his own
reality is so utterly insane it puts into perspective the risible
contentions between hate and reality, that which Nabokov himself surely
believed to exist---founding his curious sense of esoteric humour. His
intention of including this, with such exigence, is remarked upon by a
substantive dualism between all his stories; a dualism where he allows
the reader to decide the substratum view by outcome or motive, through
imagination, just as he wills his characters free to hate or laugh. Only
a few pages later, Nabokov seeks to bring forth this amusing sentiment
once more---in the context of the unnamed narrator's delusional belief
that he can see the tyrant's portrait everywhere, including within his
art pupils' form studies; latently musing to himself among the drawings,
"O cubic monster, how can I eradicate you?" (457).

As the story progresses, the solution to the main character's plight is
revealed. For the narrator to be so deeply invested in the idea itself,
of his hate, of his wish to murder his childhood friend---the tyrant; he
must be ready to bring his dull and humble life to an end. As to destroy
this idea, this "world he has created" (458), he would have to destroy
himself; asserting that by killing himself, he would kill the tyrant;
being totally inside of him, fattened on the intensity of his hatred
(457). This is Nabokov's way of speaking not to the conception of
tyrants themselves, but to the hate that leads tyrants to prosper and to
their ability to live among each and every person, perhaps even the
reader.

In the end, the narrator exclaims that the role of laughter saved him
from his own bullet; as "having experienced all the degrees of hatred
and despair, \[he\]\...achieved those heights from which one obtains a
bird's-eye view of the ludicrous," (459). If the narrator survives by
the hand of levity, so too does the reader. This establishes the role of
the writer, enshrined from Nabokov's perspective as the one to reveal
things plainly through rhetoric, that which is base and suffocating.

Both of these stories conclusively established unique perspectives
regarding humour and erudite expression as the taste necessary to
assuage future peoples from tolerating tyrants and 'the collective'.
Corrupt people may not be willing to heed the definite possibility of
their own self-destruction; but if enough people find power and the
enforcement of it en masse contemptible---even laughable, then the role
of the writer has appropriately guarded the prospects of expression and
individuality. Creating a direct political position may not be what
Nabokov seeks to do, by his own admission; but the consequence of good
writing is that appropriated reality rarely fails to follow from the
role of reality---even the political role fragmented as it may be.

### Works Cited {#works-cited .list-paragraph}

Nabokov, Vladimir, and Dmitri Nabokov. "Cloud, Castle, Lake & Tyrants
Destroyed." *The Stories of Vladimir Nabokov*, Vintage International,
New York, 2008.

An anthology of sixty-five translated and directly written short stories
by Vladimir Nabokov, from the period between 1920 and 1950.
